

CHAPTER THREE

SYSTEM ANALYSIS, DESIGN METHODOLOGY, TOOLS AND IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH

Project Title: GradAssess AI

An AI-Powered Graduate Employability Assessment Platform

3.0 Introduction

This chapter presents the methodology, tools, architectural decisions, implementation
strategy, and system design adopted in the development of GradAssess AI,
an AI-powered graduate employability assessment platform. The system was developed to
solve the major limitations observed in traditional graduate assessment processes, such as
slow grading, weak integrity monitoring, poor student feedback cycles, and limited
administrative control over assessment operations.

The platform combines a modern web-based user interface with a structured backend,
persistent database storage, automated assessment grading, AI-assisted practice mode,
certificate generation, results analysis, and career insight features. In addition to
providing a student-facing examination environment, the system also includes an
administrator workspace for managing users, assessments, attempts, certificates, and
security incidents.

The purpose of this chapter is therefore to explain how the system was conceived and
implemented from a technical point of view. It covers the development methodology used,
software and services employed, system architecture, database structure, functional
modules, security design, AI integration strategy, and the implementation workflow used
in building the application.

3.1 Development Methodology

3.1.1 Adopted Methodology

The methodology adopted for this project is an Agile incremental prototyping
methodology. This approach was selected because the platform contains multiple
interdependent modules, including authentication, dashboard views, assessment delivery,
automatic grading, AI-assisted practice, certificate management, results analysis, career
insight generation, and administrative operations. Building such a system in one rigid
cycle would have made iteration difficult, especially where interface, logic, and user
workflow had to evolve together.

Under the Agile prototype approach, the system was implemented in small functional units.
Each unit was developed, reviewed, refined, and extended before the next dependent unit
was built. For example, the authentication workflow was established before protected
student and admin dashboards were linked to live data. Likewise, the assessment-taking
interface was built before proctoring event logging, auto-grading, and certificate
issuance were fully connected.

3.1.2 Why Agile Was Suitable for This Project

The Agile approach was suitable for the following reasons:

-
It supported continuous refinement of user interfaces. The student and
admin dashboards required repeated design corrections to improve usability, clarity, and
responsiveness.

-
It made backend integration easier. Features could first be built with
mock data and later replaced with live API integration without discarding the interface.

-
It accommodated evolving requirements. As the project grew, features
such as practice review, AI-assisted grading, live admin security alerts, and dynamic
career insight generation were added or refined based on observed needs.

-
It reduced risk. Individual modules could be tested independently
before being merged into the main system workflow.

3.1.3 Major Development Phases

The implementation process followed the stages below:

- Requirement identification and feature planning.

- User interface prototyping with reusable frontend components.

- Backend API and database schema development.

- Integration of frontend and backend services.

- Integration of AI-based generation and grading support.

- Testing, correction, refinement, and usability adjustments.

3.2 Requirement Analysis

3.2.1 Functional Requirements

The developed system satisfies a number of major functional requirements. For the student
side, the platform enables users to register and log in securely, access a personal
dashboard, view assessments, take real assessments in fullscreen mode, practice with
AI-generated questions, review performance, download certificates, and receive career
insight recommendations. For the administrative side, the system allows administrators to
create and edit assessments, manage students, monitor attempts, review security alerts,
manage certificates, and configure application settings.

The assessment engine supports three question types, namely multiple choice questions
(MCQ), theory/long answer questions, and coding questions. The system also supports
automatic grading after submission, certificate issuance for passed attempts, tracking of
suspicious assessment behaviour, and live review of flagged incidents from the
administrator dashboard.

3.2.2 Non-Functional Requirements

The important non-functional requirements considered include:

- Responsiveness across desktop, tablet, and mobile devices.

- Security of authentication and role-based access control.

- Reliability of assessment session handling and result persistence.

- Scalability through modular backend and reusable frontend components.

- Usability through clean and focused user interface design.

- Maintainability through clear module boundaries and typed APIs.

3.3 System Architecture

GradAssess AI adopts a client-server architecture. The frontend client
handles user interaction, state presentation, and browser-level proctoring support,
whereas the backend provides authentication, business logic, persistence, grading,
certificate management, and administrative reporting. The database layer stores users,
assessments, questions, attempts, certificates, settings, sessions, and AI artifacts.

Architecture Summary: The system consists of a React/Next.js frontend,
a NestJS backend API, a PostgreSQL database managed through Prisma ORM, and Gemini-based
AI services for practice generation, narrative support, and open-ended grading assistance.

3.3.1 Frontend Layer

The frontend was built with Next.js using the App Router, React
19, Tailwind CSS, and Framer Motion. This layer
provides the entire visual interaction model of the system. It includes the student
dashboard, assessment catalogue, instructions page, live assessment-taking interface,
practice mode, results page, certificate pages, career insights, settings, and all admin
dashboards.

The frontend is highly componentized. Reusable components were created for cards,
navigation, metric panels, status badges, modals, forms, question renderers, palettes,
action menus, security drawers, and certificate previews. This component-based approach
simplified maintenance and allowed consistent styling across the product.

3.3.2 Backend Layer

The backend was implemented with NestJS, which provides a modular and
scalable architecture for APIs. The system backend is separated into functional modules,
including:

- Auth Module for registration, login, token refresh, logout, forgot password, reset password, and profile retrieval.

- Exams Module for assessment creation, assessment listing, exam session start, submission, grading, results, and career insights.

- Admin Module for overview analytics, user management, assessment management, attempts monitoring, certificate operations, and security review.

- AI Module for practice generation, practice review, AI-assisted grading, and narrative generation.

- Certificates Module for issuing, verifying, listing, and retrieving certificates.

- Settings Module for profile updates, preferences, notification settings, privacy controls, and session/device management.

- Proctoring Module for receiving and storing assessment integrity events.

3.3.3 Database Layer

The database layer uses PostgreSQL as the primary relational database and
Prisma ORM as the data-access layer. PostgreSQL was selected because it
is robust, widely adopted, and suitable for transactional systems that require data
integrity. Prisma was adopted because it provides a strongly typed schema, typed queries,
migrations, and improved developer productivity.

3.4 System Design

3.4.1 Major System Actors

The system was designed around two principal actors:

-
Student: The student can create an account, log in, configure profile
settings, view assessments, take assessments, practise with AI-generated questions,
view results, download certificates, and access career insights.

-
Administrator: The administrator can monitor the platform, manage
students, create and update assessments, review attempts, manage certificates, and
investigate flagged security incidents.

3.4.2 Student Module Design

The student-facing side of the platform is composed of the following major functional units:

- Authentication and Account Access: login, registration, refresh tokens, password recovery, and profile hydration.

- Dashboard Module: live overview of available assessments, certificates, readiness signals, and recent progress.

- Assessment Module: instructions, timed assessment interface, question navigation, flagging, webcam preview, fullscreen monitoring, and final submission.

- Results Module: real results history, pagination, summaries, readiness indicators, and detailed result breakdown pages.

- Practice Mode: AI-guided session setup, session generation, instant feedback, review reports, weak areas, and study plans.

- Certificates Module: certificate listing, detail view, verification sharing, and image download.

- Career Insights Module: readiness signals, role-fit suggestions, growth areas, and role spotlight information based on actual student evidence.

- Settings Module: profile, notifications, privacy, password change, and device session management.

3.4.3 Administrator Module Design

The administrator-facing system was designed as an operational dashboard. Its major modules include:

- Admin Overview: platform metrics, attempts trend, certificate summary, top categories, and activity feed.

- User Management: student list, search, filters, pagination, profile inspection, CSV export, account suspension, and access reset.

- Assessment Management: assessment creation, editing, publishing, archiving, duplication, and question-bank editing.

- Attempts Monitoring: live attempts table, detail pages, grading status, security condition, and export support.

- Certificates Management: list, detail, reissue, verify, copy verification ID, and export functionality.

- Security Alerts: flagged attempt review, severity display, incident timeline, notes, escalation, review, and flag clearance.

- Admin Settings: profile, notifications, privacy, and device-session controls.

3.4.4 Assessment Workflow Design

The assessment subsystem follows a complete lifecycle. First, an administrator creates an
exam, defines assessment metadata, and adds or imports questions. When the assessment is
published, it becomes visible to students. The student opens the instructions page,
accepts the rules, enters fullscreen mode, and begins the timed attempt. During the
attempt, answers are stored, question navigation is tracked, and integrity events such as
tab switches or webcam issues are recorded. On submission, the backend grades the
responses automatically, determines pass or fail status, and issues a certificate if the
pass mark is met.

3.5 Database Design

The Prisma schema designed for the project reflects the major entities required by the
system. The key entities and their purposes are summarized below.

Entity |

Description |

User |
Stores student and administrator records, including identity, profile, and role information. |

UserSession |
Stores refresh-token sessions, device identifiers, expiration time, and revocation state. |

Exam |
Stores each assessment, including title, status, mode, duration, pass mark, and proctoring rules. |

Question |
Stores question prompt, type, rubric, explanation, difficulty, correct answer, and metadata. |

QuestionOption |
Stores the answer options for MCQ questions. |

ExamAttempt |
Stores each student’s assessment session, score, percentage, status, device data, and grading summary. |

AttemptResponse |
Stores submitted answers, awarded marks, and auto-feedback for each question. |

ProctorEvent |
Stores integrity events such as tab switch, fullscreen exit, multiple-face detection, and suspicious activity. |

Certificate |
Stores issued certificates, hashes, verification numbers, and links to attempts and exams. |

AIArtifact |
Stores AI-generated practice sessions, reviews, study plans, and other structured AI outputs. |

UserSettings |
Stores preferences, notifications, privacy settings, and dashboard presentation choices. |

The database design was intentionally normalized so that related records can be tracked
independently. For instance, one examination can contain many questions, one student can
have many attempts, one attempt can have many proctor events, and one passed attempt can
produce one certificate. This structure supports traceability, auditability, and future
extensibility.

3.6 Technologies, Tools, and Services Used

Technology / Tool |

Purpose in the Project |

Next.js (App Router) |
Frontend framework used to build the web application interface and page routing. |

React 19 |
Component-based user interface development and client-side interaction handling. |

Tailwind CSS |
Utility-based styling system for responsive and consistent interface design. |

Framer Motion |
Subtle animations for page transitions, drawers, cards, and modal interactions. |

NestJS |
Backend framework for API design, module organization, and business logic. |

Prisma ORM |
Schema modeling, typed database access, and query abstraction for PostgreSQL. |

PostgreSQL |
Primary relational database for persistent system storage. |

Argon2 |
Password hashing and authentication security. |

JWT (JSON Web Token) |
Token-based authentication and role-protected API access. |

Gemini API |
AI support for practice generation, open-ended grading assistance, and narrative generation. |

TensorFlow.js / BlazeFace |
Fallback browser-based face detection during proctored assessments. |

Native FaceDetector API |
Primary browser face-detection path when supported. |

SVG-based backend certificate rendering |
Generating downloadable certificate files from backend-rendered markup for reliable student downloads. |

XLSX |
Question import support from spreadsheet files in the assessment authoring process. |

Docker Compose |
Provisioning PostgreSQL consistently in development. |

3.7 Artificial Intelligence Integration Strategy

One of the defining features of the project is the integration of AI into practice,
grading, and guidance workflows. The AI integration was not implemented as an isolated
chatbot but as a structured support layer around clearly defined educational tasks.

3.7.1 AI in Practice Mode

The practice subsystem uses AI to generate guided practice sessions based on a selected
category, topic, difficulty level, and question type. The generated output is normalized
into structured practice questions and stored as an AI artifact. When needed, the system
falls back to curated topic-aware templates so that the practice mode remains usable even
when the AI response is weak or unavailable.

3.7.2 AI in Open-Ended Grading

For multiple choice questions, grading is deterministic and rule-based. However, for
theory and certain coding questions, the system applies AI-assisted grading to compare the
student response with the expected answer and rubric supplied by the administrator. This
allows the platform to assign marks based on semantic closeness, coverage of key ideas,
and response quality rather than strict text matching alone. Where AI is unavailable, a
fallback heuristic grading approach is used.

3.7.3 AI in Career Insight Generation

Career insight generation is grounded in real student evidence such as scores, open-ended
response quality, consistency, integrity discipline, and certification history. AI can
optionally refine the narrative explanation, but the underlying role-fit logic is derived
from measurable platform data rather than random or purely generic output. This makes the
career guidance more credible and explainable.

3.7.4 Gemini Assessment Submission and Grading Data Flow

In the current implementation, Gemini AI participates in the system only after a student
submits a real assessment and only for theory and open-ended coding questions. The
frontend does not call Gemini directly. Instead, the student interface submits answers to
the backend, the backend loads the corresponding assessment records from the database, and
the backend decides whether a question should be graded rule-based or sent to Gemini for
AI-assisted grading. This design ensures that the grading logic remains centralized,
auditable, and protected from direct client-side tampering.

The submission lifecycle begins when the student completes the assessment and the
frontend calls POST /exams/:examId/submit. The request body contains the list of answers
keyed by question identifiers. At this point, the backend fetches the active attempt, the
parent exam, and the full question records, including options, correct answers, rubrics,
explanations, and marks. Multiple choice questions are graded immediately by comparing
the submitted option values against the stored correct option values. Theory and
open-ended coding responses are instead passed into
AiService.gradeOpenEndedResponse(...).

The backend does not ask Gemini to guess correctness in isolation. Gemini is supplied
with structured grading context assembled from the database, namely the original question
prompt, the administrator’s expected answer, the rubric, the explanatory reference text,
the student’s submitted answer, the maximum marks for the question, and the question
type. In other words, Gemini is used as a grading assistant that compares the student’s
response against teacher-defined expectations already stored in the system.

Figure 3.1: Gemini-Assisted Assessment Submission Data Flow

flowchart TD
  A[Student Frontend] -->|POST /exams/:examId/submit| B[NestJS Exams Module]
  B --> C[(PostgreSQL via Prisma)]
  B --> D{Question type}
  D -->|MCQ| E[Rule-based grading]
  D -->|Theory / Open-ended Coding| F[AiService.gradeOpenEndedResponse]
  F --> G[Gemini 1.5 Flash]
  G -->|text response containing JSON| F
  F --> H[Backend JSON extraction + validation]
  E --> I[Write AttemptResponse rows]
  H --> I
  I --> J[Update ExamAttempt score, percentage, status, gradingSummary]
  J --> K[Evaluate security review]
  J --> L{Pass threshold met?}
  L -->|Yes| M[Issue certificate]
  L -->|No| N[No certificate]
  M --> O[Return result payload to frontend]
  N --> O

Figure 3.1 shows that the backend stands between the student and Gemini at all times.
The frontend only knows that the student has submitted answers and later receives the
final computed result. The backend performs the protected steps: loading trusted grading
context from the database, invoking Gemini where needed, parsing Gemini output, storing
marks and feedback, evaluating pass/fail status, and issuing a certificate where the pass
threshold is met.

3.7.4.1 Step-by-Step Submission Lifecycle

- The student completes the assessment and the frontend sends the answers to POST /exams/:examId/submit.

- The backend locates the authenticated student’s active in-progress attempt for that exam.

- The backend loads the exam questions, question options, stored correct answers, rubric, explanation, and marks from the database.

- The backend loops through all questions and maps each submitted answer by question identifier.

- For MCQ questions, the backend compares submitted option values against the stored correct option values and awards either full marks or zero.

- For theory questions, the backend sends the grading context to Gemini through AiService.gradeOpenEndedResponse(...).

- For coding questions, the backend first checks exact equality against the stored expected answer. If there is no exact match, the backend sends the grading context to Gemini.

- Gemini returns a text response which the backend parses into JSON using the internal JSON extraction helper.

- The backend writes the awarded marks and auto feedback for each question into the AttemptResponse table.

- The backend updates the overall attempt status, score, maximum score, percentage, and grading summary in ExamAttempt.

- The backend evaluates the attempt’s security state against stored proctoring events.

- If the student meets the pass threshold, the backend issues a certificate and links it to the attempt.

- The backend returns the final grading result to the frontend, and the frontend immediately shows the student the score, percentage, outcome, and certificate information if available.

3.7.4.2 Pseudocode View of the Grading Loop

receive submitted answers
load active attempt + exam + questions from database
for each question in exam:
    get submitted answer for question
    if question is MCQ:
        compare submitted options with stored correct options
        award marks deterministically
    else if question is THEORY:
        send prompt, expectedAnswer, rubric, explanation, studentAnswer, maxMarks, questionType to Gemini
        parse JSON-like grading response
    else if question is CODING:
        if submitted answer exactly matches stored expected answer:
            award full marks
        else:
            send grading context to Gemini
            parse JSON-like grading response
    store awarded marks and auto feedback
sum total score
compute percentage
update attempt status to AUTO_GRADED
evaluate security review
if pass threshold met:
    issue certificate
return score, percentage, pass/fail, certificate

3.7.4.3 What the Backend Sends to Gemini

Field Sent | Purpose in Grading |

Question prompt | Provides the original question statement Gemini must evaluate. |

Expected answer | Supplies the teacher-defined answer stored in the database. |

Rubric | Supplies grading criteria, key points, and expected coverage where available. |

Reference explanation | Provides extra explanatory context already stored for the question. |

Student answer | Provides the actual response being graded. |

Maximum marks | Constrains the score Gemini is allowed to award. |

Question type | Tells Gemini whether it is grading theory or coding. |

Prompt instruction to return JSON only | Guides Gemini toward a machine-readable grading result. |

3.7.4.4 What Gemini Returns to the Backend

In the present implementation, Gemini is instructed to return JSON only, but the SDK
response is first received as text by the backend through result.response.text(). The
backend then extracts the JSON object from that text and parses it before using it in
grading. Therefore, the effective response handling is text transport with structured
JSON content inside the text.

Returned Key | Meaning |

awardedMarks | The marks Gemini recommends for the response. |

confidence | A value between 0 and 1 indicating Gemini’s confidence in the grading. |

summary | A concise textual explanation of the grading decision. |

matchedCriteria | Criteria or ideas the student covered successfully. |

missedCriteria | Important ideas or criteria the student failed to cover. |

3.7.4.5 Gemini Configuration Details

The Gemini integration currently uses the gemini-1.5-flash model through the official
Google Generative AI SDK in the backend. The Gemini API key is loaded from backend
environment configuration through the GEMINI_API_KEY setting and then accessed inside
the application through the NestJS configuration service. No API secret is exposed to the
frontend.

The current code does not set an explicit temperature value for Gemini requests. As a
result, the application relies on the model SDK’s default sampling behaviour. This is an
important implementation detail because it means the current integration controls Gemini
mainly through prompt design and backend validation rather than through explicit
temperature tuning.

3.7.4.6 Fallback Behaviour and Reliability Control

To prevent grading failure from breaking the assessment lifecycle, the AI module includes
a fallback heuristic grading method. If Gemini is unavailable, throws an error, or
returns text that cannot be parsed into usable JSON, the backend falls back to its own
heuristic scoring logic. This fallback uses normalized text, keyword overlap, coverage of
reference ideas, and answer length to estimate a fair score. The fallback result is then
stored and returned in the same overall attempt-processing pipeline.

3.8 Security and Integrity Design

Because GradAssess AI handles real assessment sessions, security and integrity features
were built directly into both the frontend and backend. The purpose is not only to score
students but also to preserve confidence in the validity of the results.

3.8.1 Authentication and Access Control

Authentication uses role-aware JWT-based access control. Students and administrators are
authenticated through the backend auth module. Refresh tokens are stored in session
records so that sessions can be revoked, refreshed, or invalidated after password changes
or logout actions. Protected routes are enforced both at the backend controller level and
in the frontend application flow.

3.8.2 Assessment Integrity Monitoring

During a real assessment, the following security events are monitored:

- Tab switching out of the exam view.

- Exiting fullscreen mode.

- Webcam permission loss or status change.

- Multiple face detection in the camera feed.

- No face detected for a period of time.

- Suspicious activity determined by accumulated event severity.

These events are logged as ProctorEvent records tied to a specific attempt. The
backend increments suspicious flags and may escalate the attempt status where necessary.
Administrators can later review these records from the Security Alerts dashboard.

3.8.3 Admin Security Review Workflow

The admin security dashboard provides live access to flagged sessions, including their
risk level, warning count, event timeline, device information, IP information, notes, and
review state. Incidents can be marked as reviewed, escalated, or cleared. This allows the
platform to preserve both automation and human oversight.

3.9 Implementation Procedure

The implementation procedure was organized to move from the foundation of the system to
the more intelligent and specialized features. The major implementation stages were as
follows:

- Set up the frontend and backend workspaces and establish the project structure.

- Design the Prisma schema and configure PostgreSQL persistence.

- Implement user authentication, authorization, and session handling.

- Build the reusable student and admin dashboard layouts.

- Create the assessment authoring flow and question management process.

- Implement live assessment delivery, timing, fullscreen control, webcam handling, and submission flow.

- Build automatic grading, pass/fail determination, and certificate issuance.

- Implement practice mode and connect it to AI generation and review endpoints.

- Develop results analysis, career insights, certificate management, and settings pages.

- Integrate admin views for users, attempts, certificates, and security incidents.

- Test, correct, and refine the complete user experience.

3.10 Testing and Validation Approach

Testing was carried out at different levels throughout development. At the technical
level, project builds were repeatedly validated to ensure that both frontend and backend
compiled successfully after feature integration. At the functional level, user flows were
tested manually to confirm that pages, route transitions, API integration, and interface
interactions behaved as expected.

Particular attention was given to high-risk workflows such as authentication, assessment
start and submission, score generation, certificate issuance, user settings persistence,
admin review actions, and security event logging. The project also relied on iterative UI
correction, where layout defects, state-refresh issues, and dark/light mode inconsistencies
were identified and fixed incrementally.

3.10.1 Areas Specifically Validated

- Authentication and role-based redirection.

- Frontend to backend API integration.

- Assessment timing and submission lifecycle.

- Automatic MCQ grading and AI-assisted open-ended grading.

- Certificate issuance for successful attempts.

- Student dashboard, results, certificates, and practice pages.

- Admin overview, users, assessments, attempts, certificates, and security alerts.

- Persistence of settings, session management, and refresh flows.

3.11 Hardware and Software Requirements

3.11.1 Software Requirements

- Operating System: Windows, Linux, or macOS.

- Node.js runtime.

- PostgreSQL database server.

- Modern web browser such as Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge.

- Docker and Docker Compose for local database provisioning (optional but useful).

3.11.2 Hardware Requirements

- A computer system capable of running a modern web browser.

- Stable internet access for AI-backed features and client-server communication.

- Webcam support for proctored assessments.

- Sufficient memory and storage for running the frontend, backend, and database services locally.

3.12 Summary

This chapter has explained the methodology and technical approach used in building
GradAssess AI. The system was developed using an Agile incremental methodology and
implemented through a modular client-server architecture. The frontend was built with
Next.js, React, Tailwind CSS, and Framer Motion, while the backend was implemented with
NestJS, Prisma, and PostgreSQL. AI support was added through Gemini for practice
generation, open-ended grading assistance, and narrative guidance, while security and
integrity were strengthened through browser-side monitoring and backend proctor-event
logging.

The final design supports both student and administrator workflows and provides a
complete assessment ecosystem that includes exam delivery, automatic grading,
certificate issuance, settings management, results analytics, career insights, and
security review. The next chapter can therefore focus on implementation results,
screenshots, evaluation, or system testing outcomes, depending on the structure adopted
for the remainder of the project report.
